Docs: Add page about Mi300 features (#206)
ROCm/hipSPARSELt: docs/reference/mi300-features.rst

.. meta::
   :description: MI300 features in hipSPARSELt
   :keywords: hipSPARSELt, ROCm, MI300

.. _mi300-features:

**********************************************************************
MI300 features in hipSPARSELt
**********************************************************************

Overview of MI300 support
=========================
hipSPARSELt provides support for MI300's SMFMA (Sparse Matrix Fused Multiply-Add) instructions, which
accelerate sparse matrix multiplication operations.

For SMFMA operations:

* Matrix A must be structurally sparse, with 2 out of every 4 elements on the K axis being zero
* Matrix B must be dense
* Matrix C is the accumulation matrix (destination)
* The sparse indexes determine which 2 elements out of every 4 are non-zero, where for each index pair,
  ``index0 < index1`` and ``index0 != index1``

Hardware requirements
=====================

> To use the SMFMA features in hipSPARSELt, your system must meet specific hardware and software requirements.

Reviewer: You need a new line after section title. You can get warnning without it.

Author: You just commented after I rebased - fixed everything based off the guidelines

* Must follow 2:4 structured sparsity pattern
* Requires compressed sparse format
* Must meet alignment requirements for selected data type

Matrix B (Dense)
----------------

* Must be in standard dense format
* Must meet alignment requirements for selected data type

Matrix preparation
==================

Matrix A must be prepared for SMFMA operations through a two-step process: pruning and compression.

Understanding the pruning and compression process
-------------------------------------------------

**Pruning** involves converting a dense matrix into a structured sparse format by selectively zeroing
out elements according to a specific pattern. For MI300 SMFMA operations, this pattern must be the 2:4
pattern (50% sparsity) where exactly 2 out of every 4 consecutive elements along the K dimension are
preserved, and the rest are set to zero.

**Compression** follows pruning and converts the pruned matrix into a hardware-optimized format that
stores only the non-zero values and their corresponding indices. This reduces memory requirements
and enables direct use of the SMFMA hardware instructions.

Pruning and compression workflow
--------------------------------

> The complete process involves several steps:

Reviewer: Please add an illustration for the process.

Author: Added an image

                                             dC,
                                             dD,
                                             d_workspace,
                                             &streams[0],
                                             num_streams));

Batched operations
------------------

SMFMA acceleration supports batched operations where a single sparse Matrix A is multiplied
with multiple dense Matrix B instances (broadcast mode):

.. code-block:: cpp

    // Configure sparse matrix A for batching
    CHECK_HIPSPARSELT_ERROR(hipsparseLtMatDescSetAttribute(
        &handle, &matA, HIPSPARSELT_MAT_NUM_BATCHES, &batch_count, sizeof(batch_count)));
    CHECK_HIPSPARSELT_ERROR(hipsparseLtMatDescSetAttribute(
        &handle, &matA, HIPSPARSELT_MAT_BATCH_STRIDE, &stride_a, sizeof(stride_a)));

    // Configure dense matrix B for batching
    CHECK_HIPSPARSELT_ERROR(hipsparseLtMatDescSetAttribute(
        &handle, &matB, HIPSPARSELT_MAT_NUM_BATCHES, &batch_count, sizeof(batch_count)));
    CHECK_HIPSPARSELT_ERROR(hipsparseLtMatDescSetAttribute(
        &handle, &matB, HIPSPARSELT_MAT_BATCH_STRIDE, &stride_b, sizeof(stride_b)));

> Note: Only broadcast mode (single sparse A, multiple dense B) supports SMFMA acceleration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. note::

    Only broadcast mode (single sparse A, multiple dense B) supports SMFMA acceleration.
```

Use rst note

.. meta::
   :description: MI300 features in hipSPARSELt
   :keywords: hipSPARSELt, ROCm, MI300

.. _mi300-features:

**********************************************************************

> MI300 features in hipSPARSELt

Reviewer: I would like to challenge the title. We are on the hipSPARSELt documentation page, so we do not have to state "in hipSPARSELt". Also these features are MI300 series related features or better to say:

 CDNA3 related features

Reviewer: This can affect the MI300 usage in this document.

Reviewer 2: Sure. I suggested shortening it on the index and ToC to remove the hipSPARSELt part, so we could do the same here too at your discretion (page titles are allowed to be somewhat longer than the title/Toc text). If you both think CDNA3 is better, feel free to change it. However, you might still want to mention MI300 somewhere to make the connection clear.

Author: For brevity sake, it makes sense to just state MI300 features (I don't think it's necessary to mention CDNA3, for users who want to search for this page, they're more likely to type in MI300 instead of CDNA3). I also don't think we need to say "related", since these features are already baked in via Tensile

**********************************************************************

Overview of MI300 support

> =========================

Reviewer 2: Remove this heading or add some introductory comments between the two headers (I recommend removing it)

Author: Better to remove it, indeed. Fixed

hipSPARSELt provides hardware acceleration support for sparse matrix multiplication operations
on MI300 devices.

> For hardware-accelerated sparse-dense matrix operations:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For hardware-accelerated sparse-dense matrix operations, the following conditions apply:
```

Author: Added

* One matrix must be structurally sparse, with 2 out of every 4 elements on the K axis being zero
* The other matrix must be dense
* The output matrix serves as the accumulation matrix (destination)
* The sparse indexes determine which 2 elements out of every 4 are non-zero, where for each index pair,

>   ``index0 < index1`` and ``index0 != index1``

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* One matrix must be structurally sparse. Two out of every four elements on the K axis must be zero.
* The other matrix must be dense.
* The output matrix serves as the accumulation (destination) matrix.
* The sparse indexes determine which two elements out of every four are non-zero, where for each index pair,
  ``index0 < index1`` and ``index0 != index1``.
```

Author: Fixed

Data types and precision
========================

While the MI300 hardware supports multiple data types for hardware-accelerated sparse matrix operations,
the hipSPARSELt library currently enables hardware acceleration for a subset of these types:

.. list-table::
    :header-rows: 1

    * - Input/Output Type
      - Library Data Type
      - Hardware Acceleration in hipSPARSELt

    * - float16
      - HIP_R_16F
      - ✅

    * - bfloat16
      - HIP_R_16BF
      - ✅

    * - int8
      - HIP_R_8I
      - ✅

.. note::

>   While the MI300 hardware supports additional formats like FP8 (E4M3 and E5M2) and BF8, these are not currently

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  While the MI300 hardware supports additional formats like ``FP8`` (E4M3 and E5M2) and ``BF8``, these are not currently
```

Reviewer 3: Fixed

  enabled at the library level for hardware acceleration.
  All floating-point operations accumulate in ``float32``, while integer operations accumulate in ``int32``.

  For comprehensive information on supported data types and their characteristics, please refer

>   to the :ref:`Data type support <data-type-support>` page.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  For comprehensive information on the supported data types and their characteristics, see
  :ref:`Data type support <data-type-support>`.
```

Reviewer 3: Fixed

Matrix format requirements
==========================

> For MI300 hardware acceleration, matrices must meet specific format requirements:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For MI300 hardware acceleration, the matrices must meet the specific format requirements for the matrix type.
```

Sparse matrix
-------------

* Must follow 2:4 structured sparsity pattern
* Requires compressed sparse format

> * Must meet alignment requirements for selected data type

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Sparse matrices must:

* Follow a 2:4 structured sparsity pattern
* Use a compressed sparse format
* Meet the alignment requirements for the selected data type
```

Reviewer 3: Fixed

Dense matrix
------------

* Must be in standard dense format

> * Must meet alignment requirements for selected data type

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Dense matrices must:

* Be in standard dense format
* Meet the alignment requirements for the selected data type
```

Reviewer 3: Fixed

.. note::

  The hipSPARSELt library supports configurations where either the first or second operand can be the
  structured sparse matrix; the other operand must be a dense matrix. This flexibility is achieved

>   through library-level handling that adjusts memory layout and operation order accordingly.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  The hipSPARSELt library supports configurations where either the first or second operand is the
  structured sparse matrix. The other operand must be a dense matrix. This flexibility is achieved
  through library-level handling that adjusts the memory layout and operation order accordingly.
```

Reviewer 3: Fixed

Matrix preparation
==================

> 

Reviewer 2: Should define SMFMA somewhere (either here or above). Does it stand for Sparse Matrix Fused Multiply Add?

Reviewer 3: I added a short sentence to the beginning of the page, as Vin recommended that we don't go into detail about it

> The sparse matrix must be prepared for SMFMA operations through a two-step process: pruning and compression.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The sparse matrix must be prepared for SMFMA operations through a two-step process of pruning and compression.
```

Reviewer 3: Fixed

Understanding the pruning and compression process
-------------------------------------------------

> **Pruning** involves converting a dense matrix into a structured sparse format by selectively zeroing
> out elements according to a specific pattern. For MI300 SMFMA operations, this pattern must be the 2:4
> pattern (50% sparsity) where exactly 2 out of every 4 consecutive elements along the K dimension are
> preserved, and the rest are set to zero.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Pruning** involves converting a dense matrix into a structured sparse format by selectively zeroing
out elements according to a specific pattern. For MI300 SMFMA operations, the matrix must use the 2:4
pattern (50% sparsity) where exactly two out of every four consecutive elements along the K dimension are
preserved, with the rest set to zero.
```

Reviewer 3: Fixed

**Compression** follows pruning and converts the pruned matrix into a hardware-optimized format that

> stores only the non-zero values and their corresponding indices. This reduces memory requirements

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
stores only the non-zero values and their corresponding indices. This reduces the memory requirements
```

Reviewer 3: Fixed

and enables direct use of the SMFMA hardware instructions.

Pruning and compression workflow
--------------------------------

The complete process involves several steps:

> 1. **Initialize matrix descriptors and matmul descriptor**
> 2. **Determine workspace requirements for compression**
> 3. **Allocate memory for pruned and compressed matrices**
> 4. **Perform pruning using the 2:4 sparsity pattern**
> 5. **Verify pruning success**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. **Initialize the matrix descriptors and matmul descriptor**
2. **Determine the workspace requirements for compression**
3. **Allocate memory for the pruned and compressed matrices**
4. **Perform pruning using the 2:4 sparsity pattern**
5. **Verify the pruning was successful**
```

Reviewer 3: Fixed

    bool is_valid = false;
    CHECK_HIPSPARSELT_ERROR(hipsparseLtSpMMACheckPruning(
        &handle, &matmul, dp, &is_valid, stream));
    if (!is_valid) {
        fprintf(stderr, "Error: Matrix pruning failed to achieve required sparsity pattern\n");
        goto cleanup;
    }

    // Step 6: Compress the pruned matrix
    // Convert the pruned matrix 'dp' into the compressed format 'd_compressed'
    // This format is optimized for direct use with the MI300 SMFMA hardware instructions
    CHECK_HIPSPARSELT_ERROR(
        hipsparseLtSpMMACompress(&handle, &plan, dp, d_compressed, d_compressBuffer, stream));

    // Once completed, 'd_compressed' contains the matrix in a format ready for SMFMA operations
    // This compressed matrix is used in place of the original dense matrix in subsequent operations

    // Always clean up resources when done
    cleanup:
        if (dp) CHECK_HIP_ERROR(hipFree(dp));
        if (d_compressBuffer) CHECK_HIP_ERROR(hipFree(d_compressBuffer));
        // Don't free d_compressed yet as it's needed for matmul operations

Pruning options and parameters
------------------------------

> The pruning function supports different strategies through its ``alg`` parameter:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The pruning function supports different strategies through the``alg`` parameter:
```

Reviewer 3: Fixed

* ``HIPSPARSELT_PRUNE_SPMMA_STRIP`` - Selects the two largest elements (by L1-norm) in each 1x4
  strip along the K dimension. This is the recommended option for general use.

* ``HIPSPARSELT_PRUNE_SPMMA_TILE`` - Performs pruning on a tile-by-tile basis rather than

>   strip-by-strip. May be more suitable for matrices with specific structural patterns.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  strip-by-strip. This might be more suitable for matrices with specific structural patterns.
```

Reviewer 3: Fixed

Performance considerations
--------------------------

> * Pruning is typically performed once during initialization, not in the critical path of
>   computation
> * The quality of pruning affects the accuracy of matrix multiplication results
> * For matrices that don't naturally fit the 2:4 pattern, consider pre-training with
>   structured sparsity constraints

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Pruning is typically performed once during initialization, not in the critical path of
  computation.
* The quality of pruning affects the accuracy of matrix multiplication results.
* For matrices that don't naturally fit the 2:4 pattern, consider pre-training with
  structured sparsity constraints.
```

Reviewer 3: Fixed

Matrix operation setup
======================

The following sections describe how to set up matrix operations with SMFMA, including
descriptor configuration and execution plans.

Descriptor configuration
------------------------

Matrix descriptors define the properties and memory layout for each matrix in the operation.
For SMFMA:

> * Matrix A requires a structured descriptor with 50% sparsity (2:4 pattern)
> * Matrix B uses a dense descriptor
> * Both descriptors need proper alignment (16-byte) and layout (column-major) configuration
> * Compute type should be set to FP32 accumulation on AMD platforms

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Matrix A requires a structured descriptor with 50% sparsity (2:4 pattern).
* Matrix B uses a dense descriptor.
* Both descriptors need the proper alignment (16-byte) and layout (column-major) configuration.
* The compute type should be set to ``FP32`` accumulation on AMD platforms.
```

Reviewer 3: Fixed

    hipStream_t streams[1];
    CHECK_HIP_ERROR(hipStreamCreate(&streams[0]));

    // Execute matmul operation
    CHECK_HIPSPARSELT_ERROR(hipsparseLtMatmul(&handle,
                                             &plan,
                                             &alpha,
                                             d_compressed,  // Compressed sparse matrix A
                                             dB,           // Dense matrix B
                                             &beta,
                                             dC,
                                             dD,
                                             d_workspace,
                                             &streams[0],
                                             num_streams));

    // Cleanup resources
    CHECK_HIP_ERROR(hipStreamDestroy(streams[0]));
    if (d_workspace) CHECK_HIP_ERROR(hipFree(d_workspace));

Stream usage notes
------------------

* Single stream is sufficient for most operations
* Multiple streams can improve performance when processing independent operations
* Ensure proper synchronization when using multiple streams with dependent operations

> * Stream count is specified via ``num_streams`` parameter

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The stream count is specified using the ``num_streams`` parameter
```

Reviewer 3: Fixed

Supported operations
====================

hipSPARSELt with MI300 hardware acceleration supports several types of matrix operations,
described in detail below.

Standard matrix multiplication
------------------------------

The basic operation performs sparse-dense matrix multiplication with optional scaling:

.. code-block:: cpp

    // D = α × op(sparse_matrix) × op(dense_matrix) + β × C
    // Note: Either the first or second operand can be the sparse matrix
    CHECK_HIPSPARSELT_ERROR(hipsparseLtMatmul(&handle,
                                             &plan,
                                             &alpha,
                                             compressed_matrix,  // Compressed sparse matrix
                                             dense_matrix,      // Dense matrix
                                             &beta,
                                             dC,
                                             dD,
                                             d_workspace,
                                             &streams[0],
                                             num_streams));

Batched operations
------------------

> hipSPARSELt supports multiple types of batched operations, which provides support for

Reviewer 2: Use an unnumbered list below.

Author: Fixed

> hipSPARSELt supports multiple types of batched operations, which provides support for

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
hipSPARSELt supports multiple types of batched operations, which provide support for
```

Author: Fixed

MI300 hardware acceleration:

> 1. **Broadcast Mode (Single Sparse Matrix/Multiple Dense Matrices)**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
*  **Broadcast mode (single sparse matrix/multiple dense matrices)**
```

   A single sparse matrix is multiplied with multiple dense matrices.

   .. code-block:: cpp

       // Configure sparse matrix (constant across all batch operations)
       CHECK_HIPSPARSELT_ERROR(hipsparseLtMatDescSetAttribute(
           &handle, &sparse_mat, HIPSPARSELT_MAT_NUM_BATCHES, &batch_count, sizeof(batch_count)));
       CHECK_HIPSPARSELT_ERROR(hipsparseLtMatDescSetAttribute(
           &handle, &sparse_mat, HIPSPARSELT_MAT_BATCH_STRIDE, &zero_stride, sizeof(zero_stride)));

       // Configure dense matrices (different for each batch operation)
       CHECK_HIPSPARSELT_ERROR(hipsparseLtMatDescSetAttribute(
           &handle, &dense_mat, HIPSPARSELT_MAT_NUM_BATCHES, &batch_count, sizeof(batch_count)));
       CHECK_HIPSPARSELT_ERROR(hipsparseLtMatDescSetAttribute(
           &handle, &dense_mat, HIPSPARSELT_MAT_BATCH_STRIDE, &dense_stride, sizeof(dense_stride)));

> 2. **Multiple Sparse and Dense Matrices**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
*  **Multiple sparse and dense matrices**
```

   Different sparse and dense matrix pairs are multiplied in each batch operation.

   .. code-block:: cpp

       // Configure sparse matrices (different for each batch operation)
       CHECK_HIPSPARSELT_ERROR(hipsparseLtMatDescSetAttribute(
           &handle, &sparse_mat, HIPSPARSELT_MAT_NUM_BATCHES, &batch_count, sizeof(batch_count)));
       CHECK_HIPSPARSELT_ERROR(hipsparseLtMatDescSetAttribute(
           &handle, &sparse_mat, HIPSPARSELT_MAT_BATCH_STRIDE, &sparse_stride, sizeof(sparse_stride)));

       // Configure dense matrices (different for each batch operation)
       CHECK_HIPSPARSELT_ERROR(hipsparseLtMatDescSetAttribute(
           &handle, &dense_mat, HIPSPARSELT_MAT_NUM_BATCHES, &batch_count, sizeof(batch_count)));
       CHECK_HIPSPARSELT_ERROR(hipsparseLtMatDescSetAttribute(
           &handle, &dense_mat, HIPSPARSELT_MAT_BATCH_STRIDE, &dense_stride, sizeof(dense_stride)));

> 3. **Batched Bias Addition**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
*  **Batched bias addition**
```
